blog: add reconciling-with-state (#440)
open-feature/openfeature.dev: blog/2024-02-28-reconciling-with-state.md

---
slug: "reconciling-with-state"
title: "Reconciling with State: Simplifications and Improvements to Better Support Framework-Specific SDKs"
date: 2024-02-28
authors: [toddbaert]
description: "Simplifications and Improvements to Better Support Framework-Specific SDKs"
tags: [client, spec, specification, web, mobile, sdk, state, events, react]
draft: false
---

## Recent Specification Changes 🗒

There's no shortage of frameworks available when it comes to the development of enterprise software.

> Weather it's the "frontend" or "backend", developers are quick to avail things like React, Spring, Gin and Flask to avoid boilerplate code and structure their applications in a familiar way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether it's the "frontend" or "backend", developers are quick to avail things like React, Spring, Gin and Flask to avoid boilerplate code and structure their applications in a familiar way.
```

When a user logs in, or some state is modified, [providers](https://openfeature.dev/specification/glossary#provider) frequently need to fetch a new ruleset or re-evaluate their cache of flags based on the new contextual data.
We refer to this as _reconciliation_.
During reconciliation, some asynchronous work is often required (frequently this takes form of some kind of network request).
During this time, depending on the provider and the needs of the application, it might be necessary to display loading indicators, or prevent users from taking action.
Some frameworks have patterns or in-built functionality to support this, such as React's [suspense](https://react.dev/reference/react/Suspense).
In order to leverage such features, we've added a new `RECONCILING` provider state and `PROVIDER_RECONCILING` provider event.

> These indicate the provider is in the process of reconciling it's internal state due to a context change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These indicate that the provider is reconciling its internal state due to a context change.
```

This state management was burdensome for provider authors, and the addition of new states (such as `RECONCILING` mentioned above) only worsened that issue.
Additionally, it allowed for widely divergent behavior between provider implementations, making the creation of framework-specific SDKs difficult and their behavior less predictable between providers, without meaningful benefit.
With this update, _the provider interface has become stateless_.
Now, the SDK itself maintains the provider's state based on the completion of lifecycle functions (`initialization`, `shutdown`, `on context change`) and events emitted by the provider.
This simplifies things for provider authors, and results in a uniform experience for application authors, especially when leveraging framework-specific SDKs.

### Bad States

In some circumstances, providers may not be able to evaluate flags.
This could be because a provider hasn't yet been fully initialized, or has experienced some internal error.

> Previously, provider-authors had to ensure their publicly exposed state was updated if such errors occurred, as well as emit an error event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, provider authors had to ensure their publicly exposed state was updated if such errors occurred, as well as emit an error event.
```

We used it without `-` before.
